Title: Keyboard latency
URL: https://danluu.com/keyboard-latency/

If you look at “gaming" keyboards, a lot of them sell for $100 or more on the promise that they’re fast. Ad copy that you’ll see includes: a custom designed keycap that has been made shorter to reduce the time it takes for your actions to register 8x FASTER - Polling Rate of 1000Hz: Response time 0.1 milliseconds Wield the ultimate performance advantage over your opponents with light operation 45g key switches and an actuation 40% faster than standard Cherry MX Red switches World's Fastest Ultra Polling 1000Hz World's Fastest Gaming Keyboard, 1000Hz Polling Rate, 0.001 Second Response Time Despite all of these claims, I can only find one person who’s publicly benchmarked keyboard latency and they only tested two keyboards. In general, my belief is that if someone makes performance claims without benchmarks, the claims probably aren’t true, just like how code that isn’t tested (or otherwise verified) should be assumed broken. The situation with gaming keyboards reminds me a lot of talking to car salesmen: Salesman: this car is super safe! It has 12 airbags! Me: that’s nice, but how does it fare in crash tests? Salesman: 12 airbags! Sure, gaming keyboards have 1000Hz polling, but so what? Two obvious questions are: Does keyboard latency matter? Are gaming keyboards actually quicker than other keyboards? Does keyboard latency matter? A year ago, if you’d asked me if I was going to build a custom setup to measure keyboard latency, I would have said that’s silly, and yet here I am, measuring keyboard latency with a logic analyzer. It all started because I had this feeling that some old computers feel much more responsive than modern machines. For example, an iMac G4 running macOS 9 or an Apple 2 both feel quicker than my 4.2 GHz Kaby Lake system. I never trust feelings like this because there’s decades of research showing that users often have feelings that are the literal opposite of reality, so got a high-speed camera and started measuring actual keypress-to-screen-update latency as well as mouse-move-to-screen-update latency. It turns out the machines that feel quick are actually quick, much quicker than my modern computer -- computers from the 70s and 80s commonly have keypress-to-screen-update latencies in the 30ms to 50ms range out of the box, whereas modern computers are often in the 100ms to 200ms range when you press a key in a terminal. It’s possible to get down to the 50ms range in well optimized games with a fancy gaming setup, and there’s one extraordinary consumer device that can easily get below 50ms, but the default experience is much slower. Modern computers have much better throughput, but their latency isn’t so great. Anyway, at the time I did these measurements, my 4.2 GHz kaby lake had the fastest single-threaded performance of any machine you could buy but had worse latency than a quick machine from the 70s (roughly 6x worse than an Apple 2), which seems a bit curious. To figure out where the latency comes from, I started measuring keyboard latency because that’s the first part of the pipeline. My plan was to look at the end-to-end pipeline and start at the beginning, ruling out keyboard latency as a real source of latency. But it turns out keyboard latency is significant! I was surprised to find that the median keyboard I tested has more latency than the entire end-to-end pipeline of the Apple 2. If this doesn’t immedately strike you as absurd, consider that an Apple 2 has 3500 transistors running at 1MHz and an Atmel employee estimates that the core used in a number of high-end keyboards today has 80k transistors running at 16MHz. That's 20x the transistors running at 16x the clock speed -- keyboards are often more powerful than entire computers from the 70s and 80s! And yet, the median keyboard today adds as much latency as the entire end-to-end pipeline as a fast machine from the 70s. Let’s look at the measured keypress-to-USB latency on some keyboards: keyboard latency (ms) connection gaming apple magic (usb) 15 USB FS hhkb lite 2 20 USB FS MS natural 4000 20 USB das 3 25 USB logitech k120 30 USB unicomp model M 30 USB FS pok3r vortex 30 USB FS filco majestouch 30 USB dell OEM 30 USB powerspec OEM 30 USB kinesis freestyle 2 30 USB FS chinfai silicone 35 USB FS razer ornata chroma 35 USB FS Yes olkb planck rev 4 40 USB FS ergodox 40 USB FS MS comfort 5000 40 wireless easterntimes i500 50 USB FS Yes kinesis advantage 50 USB FS genius luxemate i200 55 USB topre type heaven 55 USB FS logitech k360 60 "unifying" The latency measurements are the time from when the key starts moving to the time when the USB packet associated with the key makes it out onto the USB bus. Numbers are rounded to the nearest 5 ms in order to avoid giving a false sense of precision. The easterntimes i500 is also sold as the tomoko MMC023. The connection column indicates the connection used. USB FS stands for the usb full speed protocol, which allows up to 1000Hz polling, a feature commonly advertised by high-end keyboards. USB is the usb low speed protocol, which is the protocol most keyboards use. The ‘gaming’ column indicates whether or not the keyboard is branded as a gaming keyboard. wireless indicates some kind of keyboard-specific dongle and unifying is logitech's wireless device standard. We can see that, even with the limited set of keyboards tested, there can be as much as a 45ms difference in latency between keyboards. Moreover, a modern computer with one of the slower keyboards attached can’t possibly be as responsive as a quick machine from the 70s or 80s because the keyboard alone is slower than the entire response pipeline of some older computers. That establishes the fact that modern keyboards contribute to the latency bloat we’ve seen over the past forty years. The other half of the question is, does the latency added by a modern keyboard actually make a difference to users? From looking at the table, we can see that among the keyboard tested, we can get up to a 40ms difference in average latency. Is 40ms of latency noticeable? Let’s take a look at some latency measurements for keyboards and then look at the empirical research on how much latency users notice. There’s a fair amount of empirical evidence on this and we can see that, for very simple tasks, people can perceive latencies down to 2ms or less. Moreover, increasing latency is not only noticeable to users, it causes users to execute simple tasks less accurately. If you want a visual demonstration of what latency looks like and you don’t have a super-fast old computer lying around, check out this MSR demo on touchscreen latency. Are gaming keyboards faster than other keyboards? I’d really like to test more keyboards before making a strong claim, but from the preliminary tests here, it appears that gaming keyboards aren’t generally faster than non-gaming keyboards. Gaming keyboards often claim to have features that reduce latency, like connecting over USB FS and using 1000Hz polling. The USB low speed spec states that the minimum time between packets is 10ms, or 100 Hz. However, it’s common to see USB devices round this down to the nearest power of two and run at 8ms, or 125Hz. With 8ms polling, the average latency added from having to wait until the next polling interval is 4ms. With 1ms polling, the average latency from USB polling is 0.5ms, giving us a 3.5ms delta. While that might be a significant contribution to latency for a quick keyboard like the Apple magic keyboard, it’s clear that other factors dominate keyboard latency for most keyboards and that the gaming keyboards tested here are so slow that shaving off 3.5ms won’t save them. Another thing to note about gaming keyboards is that they often advertise "n-key rollover" (the ability to have n simulataneous keys pressed at once — for many key combinations, typical keyboards will often only let you press two keys at once, excluding modifier keys). Although not generally tested here, I tried a "Razer DeathStalker Expert Gaming