Title: Carbon capture using olivine - Works in Progress Magazine
URL: https://worksinprogress.co/issue/olivine-weathering

Olivine is a green mineral that reacts with CO2 in the ocean to form a harmless silt. This reaction might be the key to slowing down climate change, or reversing it altogether. A long cycle – as powerful as it is slow – is at work in the rocks, rainwater and air of Earth. Over eons, it moderates the planet’s temperature, makes molehills of mountains, and smooths out fluctuations in the climate.Consider the lowly carbon dioxide molecule. When released into the atmosphere from fossil fuel combustion or a volcanic eruption, a molecule of CO₂ will only stay in the air for four to five years on average. By that point, it is more likely than not to have become part of a plant via photosynthesis, or have dissolved into rainwater and flushed into the ocean. When the tree it was incorporated into decomposes, or it roils up to the surface of the sea on the crest of a wave, it enters the atmosphere again, ad infinitum.But there’s a catch to this process: weathering. Dissolved CO₂, in the form of carbonic acid (H₂CO₃), makes rainwater slightly acidic – even in preindustrial times, the pH of rainwater was well below six – and acids react with the rocks that comprise the Earth’s surface. Most of our planet’s crust (about 90 percent) is composed of silicates, minerals formed by bonding metal atoms to one of a number of combinations of silicon and oxygen. When rainfall hits a silicate molecule, the metal reacts with the dissolved carbonic acid to form a carbonate mineral (containing the carbonate ion CO₃⁻² or the closely related bicarbonate, H₂CO₃), abandoning the silicate ion to an independent existence as silicon dioxide (SiO₂) – plain beach sand. Since both the carbonate and the sand usually end up flowing down into the ocean with the rainwater that birthed them, the reaction of dissolved CO₂ with minerals is one of the primary forces that files jagged Himalayas and Andes down into soft, rounded Appalachians and Ozarks. As is often the case in chemistry, other factors come into play. More acidic rainwater and warmer temperatures cause the weathering reaction to proceed faster than it otherwise would. The result, over a time period of thousands to millions of years, is that atmospheric CO₂ levels are self-correcting: when they rise (usually due to geological activity), the rate of weathering speeds up, which sequesters the excess carbon faster. Under normal (i.e., preindustrial) conditions, this process is slow: volcanoes emit no more than 380 megatonnes, that is 380 million tonnes,1 of CO₂ into the atmosphere yearly, while natural weathering sequesters about 300 megatonnes. Atmospheric carbon levels rise (and fall) very slowly under normal circumstances, since one atmospheric ppm (part per million) of CO₂ represents about 7.8 gigatonnes (7,800 megatonnes), and some is absorbed by the oceans. At a yearly net increase of 80 megatonnes, it would take over thirty millennia for atmospheric CO₂ levels to rise as much as they have since the mid-eighteenth century. Even in the absence of volcanic activity it would take 130 years for natural weathering to remove even a single year of today’s emissions. As this article went to press in May 2023, global temperatures were sitting at a little over one degree centigrade above the preindustrial average and closer to two degrees where most people live. While this sounds like a nuisance, the effects are stark and becoming increasingly clear every year – witness the 18°C high in Warsaw on New Year’s Day of this year (five degrees above the previous record for January), or the heat wave that struck China during the summer of 2022, during which overnight lows hovered at nearly 35°C and the country’s largest river, the Yangtze, ran dry. Though the truly apocalyptic scenarios of four or five degree warming feared in the early 2010s now look much less likely as the renewable energy transition accelerates, it is nearly certain that the Earth will warm to 1.5 degrees Celsius above preindustrial levels within the next couple of decades, and probable that we will reach a cumulative two-degree benchmark by the end of this century in the absence of much stronger emissions reductions efforts.While merely reducing emissions will prevent additional future warming and its accompanying consequences, it won’t undo the damage that’s been done, at least not on the timescales to which humans need. It’s worth recalling that sustained warming over pre-industrial levels did not start until around 1920, and cumulative warming did not hit the half-degree mark until about the turn of this century.2 Indeed, even if everyone on Earth stopped burning all fossil fuels tomorrow, temperatures could continue to rise for several decades, as there is a lag between the emission of carbon dioxide and its full effect on surface temperature (though there is a counterbalancing effect from carbon sinks that makes this judgment uncertain). And while investment in renewable energy has been skyrocketing in recent years, over 80 percent of the world’s energy consumption still comes from fossil fuels. An immediate and abrupt collapse in carbon emissions would mean returning the vast majority of the world’s population to preindustrial living standards. In addition to being politically infeasible, it’s not even clear that the benefits of such a move would outweigh its moral costs. Without fossil fuels, for example, the Haber-Bosch process for making fertilizer, without which the world’s fields would only be able to feed about half as many people as they do today, is not possible.3 Reducing carbon emissions to zero tomorrow is impossible, undesirable, and insufficient. The West will likely always need to use some fossil fuels, and developing countries will need to use some fossil fuels to continue growing their economies, but we should aim for levels of atmospheric carbon that are lower than today’s, within the preindustrial range. Together this means we need to think about an additional route: as well as finding ways to provide electricity, and power cars cheaply and reliably without fossil fuels, what if we removed excess CO₂ from the atmosphere as well? When the term ‘carbon sequestration’ comes up, most people think of trees: purchase a carbon credit when booking a flight and, more likely than not, you’ve paid someone to plant a sapling somewhere.Unfortunately, tree planting has serious disadvantages. Most significantly, its space requirements are immense. To reduce atmospheric CO₂ (currently about 418 ppm) by 100 ppm, within striking distance of the 280 ppm found in preindustrial times, you’d need to convert 900 million hectares to mature forest (an area about 94 percent the size of mainland China and 85 percent the size of Europe).Even if that was possible, mature forests (which sequester more carbon in their soil than in their trees) take a long time to grow, and much if not most of the land available for reforestation is held by private actors, which creates significant political difficulties.More promising solutions for direct-air capture 4 are more likely to come from chemistry rather than biology. Several companies have broken ground in this field, such as Climeworks, Carbon Engineering and 1PointFive. All use a reusable sorbent, a chemical that reacts with CO₂ in the air and then releases it when energy is supplied (usually when it’s heated up). The captured, concentrated CO₂ is then pumped underground, where it is permanently trapped in geological formations in its gaseous, pressurized form, or mineralized into stable carbonates via reactions with the surrounding rock.Sorbent-based direct-air capture is not a new idea, and is already used on space stations to moderate CO₂ levels. Like space applications, Climeworks uses an amine sorbent, which releases its captured CO₂ at a relatively low temperature (about 100°C). Unfortunately, amine-based sorbents are extraordinarily expensive – a study on the economics of amine-based sorbents published last year concluded that